on the faculty would be more, might make more of an impression possibly.
And he just waffled.
I don't really know if he ever did or not.
There was no change in the young man's attire, so.
Share some anecdotes that you remember about teaching Aggie students.
Teaching Aggie?
Some funny, some serious.
Well,
I can kind of continue this pattern of being female in the school.
I had a student, a Hispanic student, who was a terrible, terrible student.
He was lazy, he didn't work, he didn't do anything, he made Fs.
And one day he came, but he was always very, very polite,
and just did everything right, never complained.
One day he came to me and said, I want to say goodbye to you.
And I said, what do you mean?
In the middle of the semester, I got kicked out of school.
Why?
He wouldn't salute a female officer.
And he and I had a long talk, and I said, why didn't you want to salute the female officer?
He said, women have no business
in leadership roles, and she's dumb, and I don't know why not.
And I said, look, you've always been very polite to me.
You seem to have accepted the fact that even though I'm a woman, I'm also a person in authority.
Why can't you do that with this other lady?
And he said, I admire you because you have degrees, you have backgrounds, and you know what you're doing.
She doesn't.
So I tried to tell him that's stupid to get kicked out of school for that.
And I told him, he said he wanted to go in the service eventually, you're going to have to salute a great many women.
That was already maybe the early 80s.
But he did get kicked out of school.
He came back a year or two later and visited with me.
And apparently he made his peace with everybody.
But I thought that was so typically Aggie, so macho.
I won't salute an officer because she's a woman.
As a classroom teacher, what were your rules for their conduct in the classroom?
Did you have any standard guidelines?
I never really published them, you might say.
I expected my students to come to class reasonably well dressed, not their bare feet.
and listening, being quiet and behaving.
Otherwise I really had never had any problem or any big groups.
Occasionally somebody in the back, you know how they do, start talking.
I'd simply stop what I was saying or doing and look at them and everything would be dead quiet.
I never had any problem.
What about if they went to sleep during class?
I let them sleep.
Did they ever attempt any jokes or pranks during class?
No.
Really?
On the whole, I think they were better behaved with me than they might have been with some of the men, because I was such a novelty.
They didn't quite know which way the wind was blowing.
Were they polite?
Tremendously.
I have never had a rude student.
Oh, now that's a good one.
I'm glad you mentioned that.
It was really interesting.
Can you give some examples of their politeness?
Well it was always, you know, yes ma'am, no ma'am, if I was going in or out, open doors and what have you, and if we were talking, they never really, you know,
got to the point where they said something like, you don't know what you're talking about.
It was always very, very polite.
Now, in class, as you began, we had female students.
How did the male and female students relate to each other?
At the very beginning, when I started teaching, I didn't have any females.
My very first classroom,
had, I don't know, I think 27 corps members and three non-corps members.
And those three really stood out.
But again I must say that the corps members all throughout, not just at that time, were definitely the most polite of any of them.
The civilian students were very polite too, but in a more relaxed
way, you know, they didn't really come to attention and say, yes, ma'am.
And then when I got the women, there were several all at once.
I think that helped.
I never said a word about anything.
I just went about my business, talking what I was supposed to do, calling on them.
in elementary language courses, you'd call a lot on your students.
I'd just call on them indiscriminately.
It was no problem whatsoever.
In terms of their capability for the entry courses, how well prepared were they?
Well, with the first-year course, it didn't matter because it started from scratch.
The problem we had for several years
were transfer students who had taken one year with foreign language at Prairie View or at Blinn and made A's.
And here they were making F's.
And I understand that Blinn has really changed its ways completely.
I don't know about Prairie View.
But that, for a while, was an escape for some of the students.
They knew it would be difficult for them to take it somewhere else.
But I even called Austin once.
Whoever our president was at the time told me to try.
and asked if it was true that we had to accept a student, a transfer student, even from our junior college, with his so-called credit.
And they said, yes you do.
And that made for a little bit of unhappiness because I can see the student's part of B very well.
He didn't do anything, made an A. Here's in my class all of a sudden, or somebody else's, my colleagues came to me to complain, and they're failing the course in the second year.
And this problem existed in all of the languages.
Yes.
I think it was pretty much restricted to Spanish because Glen and Prairie View only offered Spanish as a foreign language.
So they may be doing more now but at the time they didn't.
And your grading philosophy, did you grade on the curve?
No.
I don't know how I'd feel today.
I never did grade on the curve.
I never did either.
I had a strict test laid out, so many points for each, and if you missed it, that many points were taken off, and that was it.
And interestingly enough, even though I had some very poor students, it didn't seem to matter.
I mean, I didn't find too many students failing.
on account of too many little F's or something.
It just seemed to work out.
There were good many A's.
It was just a pretty regular bell curve in the end.
Do you remember any rather incredible excuses that students tried to give you for their ... There were some, but I'm not sure I can remember them.
Mainly the funny ones
were for explaining their absence.
This is really true.
One student must have thought I was a little dense.
In one semester he had three grandmothers die on him.
Well he came up and said, I missed your class because I had to go to Henderson, Texas.
My grandmother died.
Fine, I'm sorry to hear it.
Okay.
But he came back twice.
And after that I said, how many grandmothers do you have?
What was his response to that question?
Didn't he blush?
I remember seeing that red face.
I said, well forget it, but don't come with your grandmother again.
Don't bring her up again.
I had a student one year, when he turned in his final exam, he asked if he turned in the ticket to me.
And I said, what kind of a ticket?
And he said, the ticket to take the final exam.
I said, what do you mean?
He said, well, last night in our core dorm, there was a sophomore selling final exam tickets for $5, and I bought mine.
And when I told him what I thought had happened to him, he was ready to get back to the dorm.
That's something, isn't it?
Did you ever have any, no phone calls in the middle of the night?
I had one or two.
Do you remember what?
Well I had one where a student actually threatened me.
Or he said you either give me a passing grade or else.
He didn't say else what, just or else.
And I told David Maxwell about it, David Maxwell told the police chief about it, nothing ever came of it.
One funny thing that happened once, you know we had the language lab, and at the time we still had the reels with
You had to rewind, and we had student workers, quite a lot of student workers in it.
And one night, about one in the morning, I got a phone call from the university police.
Your lab seems to have been broken into, and it looks terrible.
There must be a lot of damage.
Can you come right over?
I said, sure.
They called Dave Maxwell, too.
And sure enough, when I got there, the place looked like, you remember the Addams Family?
They were unwound tape all over, reel after reel.
The whole thing was like, I don't know, a nest of some kind.
And we couldn't imagine what happened.
And the next day, when our lab supervisor showed up,
We talked about it, and I said, is anything missing?
He said, no, I've looked everywhere.
It's just a mess, but there's nothing missing.
He said, also, that tape was to be destroyed.
It was old and used up.
A few hours later, I found out that one of the lab workers had gone in and thought it would be a cute joke to do that.
put that stuff everywhere and then said well whoever comes in here is going to have a good surprise.
And you said she.
It was a she.
So I had a talk with her and she apologized.
She said it just seemed like a harmless, it was a harmless prank.
But I said well you know you just got a whole bunch of people out in the middle of the night, including me.
All right, in relation to the students, do you remember some heartwarming positive events where students came by to thank, came by to... I have had a lot of those, a whole lot of them.
And I've had one or two who came to tell me that maybe they didn't learn much French from me, but I was such a good influence on them, and I helped them with some of their decision-making or something like that.
Because I was always pretty close to students, not those who wanted to be.
If they wanted to come to me and talk, fine, I'll talk.
I think I was more of a counselor to them than the counselors were.
But sometimes that doesn't work.
I had a very upsetting experience.
experience with one woman.
She was an awfully nice person, but she was, I don't know what to call it, super, super, super religious, evangelical, and she never thought she was good enough.
Everything was always beyond her, and
I tried to talk her out of it.
She came to me several times, and apparently, I found out later, she also went to the Episcopal student pastor or whatever, student minister.
She talked to several people, but she did some work for me.
She did an independent study course, and in the course of which we had a
She wanted to sign all her letters, yours truly in Christ, in French, you know.
I'm sorry, you can't do that in the French, there's no way to do it.
And no, to this day, no Frenchman would do that.
That is a way that we have of saying something we want to express in English, but there's no real cultural
equivalent of it.
So she was quite upset about that, but let it go.
But anyway, she killed us after she committed suicide.
While she was a student?
Uh-huh.
That was rough, because I, you know, we always feel I should have done more.
Why didn't I do this or that?
And I was relieved to find out that I wasn't the only one that she had talked to.
But apparently she just
I don't know, had no self-image of herself as a successful person.
She was nice.
She was not terribly gifted or anything, but a good average student.
Now, before you became department head, did you and the other female faculty members ever get together on anything?
Rarely.
Who were the other key?
T'Ulani was one of them.
L-A-A-N-E, her husband's in the chemistry department, Jan Lani.
And Ajit Larebo, whose husband I understand was a pain in the neck in nuclear or something or other.
By the way they're in Brussels, Belgium.
I've visited them a couple of times.
And he finally got a job, and she's got a job.
But they were there.
Any other, in women in any other departments?
No, not very much.
So there wasn't a faculty women's committee or group or anything?
If there was, I never heard of it.
All right, then, and you got promoted on up the line.
When did you work on the doctoral degree?
When did I, I got in 71.
And you became department head?
Two years later.
And what was your thesis?
My thesis was on teachers, well, what did I call it?
Anyway, on teachers' perceptions of various things.
And who was your chairman?
Dr. Varvel.
Walter?
Walter.
Walter Varvel?
Walter, yes.
I had his daughter Mary in class the first summer.
I had his son in class.
She was in my class the first summer I taught in 60, along with a young lady named Ann Rudder.
I had them both in the same class.
Dr. Varber was most unhappy when Ann made a beat.
because he told me she had never made a B at A&M Consolidated.
I said, sir, this is A&M College.
This is not high school.
Then he said, what did the rudder girl make?
And I said, she made a B. He said, oh, okay.
Okay.
What was the process for your becoming department head?
How did that come about?
The process was a little bit unpleasant because there was sort of an organization, you might say, of discontents who wanted Jack out.
And I wasn't terribly involved in it for some reason.
I didn't pay much attention to it.
And for some reason, I think that went to
to the dean's office.
And David really said he told me that later.
He said, I can't work with Jack.
It's just not possible.
And I think we ought to edit that out.
But then he started inquiring and having interviews with some of the faculty.
He invited some possible replacements for Jack from Tulane and a number of other places, and we interviewed them.
Nobody was impressed, and eventually the faculty in the department suggested to David that I would make a good department head, and David went along with the idea.
He said he wasn't sure it was going to fly because of my being a woman, and there hadn't been any other before.
But he said he'd be glad to try, sure enough.
It took a good while to go through, but it worked out that way.
This is what year?
Do you remember hearing anything from Dr. Calhoun's office?
Because I, as dean of faculties, don't remember any negatives at all regarding it.
I didn't hear any, and if Dave did, he didn't tell me.
Were you a full professor at that time?
No, assistant professor.
I remained as an assistant professor.
Then I became an associate professor.
And eventually, full professor only, oh, I think maybe three years, four years before I retired.
And so you were appointed in 74?
73.
Did anyone give you, was there an interview with the dean?
Well, I'd had an interview with the dean.
I mean a long one.
A couple of interviews, really.
Do you remember what he seemed to be most concerned about?
Yes.
He was very much concerned with the quality of the faculty in the department.
I can give you an example.
Jack, God bless him, is dead.
We were looking to fill a position in Spanish, a new position.
And Jack found somebody who had been teaching bilingual education in elementary school for three years.
And they were looking for a job, and Jack thought he'd make a fine addition.
And David just threw that out.
He said, I want some PhDs in there.
I want some people who will do research and publish.
It's got to become a respectable department.
And to the extent to which he could, he was going to support that with the funding.
And during that period then in the early 70s, did you all begin to feel you were treated like other departments?
Oh, we always felt like the stepchild.
Is that right?
But actually we really were.
We taught so many service courses, and the
As I said, our teaching loads were so heavy still, nobody had time to do research or publish anything.
And that needed to be addressed.
And it was.
It was?
It was.
Beginning when?
Beginning I'd say within a year after my becoming department head, because Dave really supported that.
He even increased my budget a couple of times.
I made out the budget, which always took me a good while to do, and sent it up to him, and he came back and said, why don't you ask for a little more here, a little more there?
He said, I think I can get it for you.
Usually I got cut down, so that was a nice breath of fresh air.
then you would give him high marks.
Did you have any interaction with the vice president for academic affairs or hear anything from him or the president?
Occasionally there'd be sort of more sort of informal things.
Nothing
I don't remember anything, really.
Did you have the impression that Dr. Calhoun and Dr. Williams were supportive of the liberal arts?
Well, Dr. Williams would have had to have been, I believe.
By the way, the way he introduced me, we still had the old, what was it called, faculty council.
At my first meeting,
Academic counsel.
The first meeting I attended, because I was the only female there, he said he wanted to introduce me and nobody should have ever been in any doubt who I was.
So I think that all the A&M presidents since I started out here
have had a problem with the pressures brought from the various colleges.
And liberal arts always seemed to, I don't know, maybe they didn't lobby hard enough, as hard as engineering or agriculture.
But I think Dave Maxwell probably tried his best to get as much from the college as he could.
But again, a lot of
When that happened, a lot of that went to economics.
Economics is hardly a liberal art, but I'm concerned.
But eventually within I'd say a five year period, by the end of the 70s things were going pretty well.
And we could at least see a better future.
What were your goals as you became a department head, your goals for the department?
My goals for the department were primarily to really have an excellent faculty.
But I was interested in an excellent faculty as teachers, every bit as much as publishing.
Because I felt that basically, I've always been a teacher at heart, and I felt that our first responsibility
must be to the students.
We can't say, well, we won't have any class on Friday, I've got to finish my article on something or other, or come to class unprepared because you're too busy doing your research.
It had to be balanced, and there's a fine line there.
I was mostly interested in really giving the students something that would stay with them for the rest of their lives, and not just a little smattering of this or that and forget it.
Within the department, did you all have a merit salary system in effect at that time?
At that time, yes.
And how did you all judge merit?
Unfortunately, up in the dean's office and higher on up, it was done mainly on the publications record.
As far as I was concerned, we have these teaching questionnaires, whatever.
I took those into consideration personally for about half of the whole thing.
It's all very well to say I have a book coming out
And then have all these students telling me here in writing, this is the worst professor I've ever had.
She or he is never prepared.
There were lots of those.
And there were a lot of conflicts with faculty, between faculty and students.
And so the married deal became a little difficult.
Right now, I'm not going to ask the negative.
During your years as department head, what stars in the department began to shine brightest?
Wolf Kupke.
And some of the Spanish people.
Luis Costa, definitely.
And we had another gentleman named O'Connor, Tom O'Connor.
who did an awful lot for the department, but unfortunately left for a better job.
And there were some people natural leaders as well as teachers and researchers.
And the French section always had the most friction.
Really?
Among each other, among themselves.
It was just personalities?
A French woman and a Frenchman.
Ah.
I hear you.
And then a bunch of others who were uncomfortable, didn't know which way to go.
Which was the most cohesive section?
German.
there will be order?
In part, yes.
And in part because of Wolf Kupke being such a father figure to a lot of them.
to the younger PhDs.
Wolfgang has a very distinguished record of publications and all sorts of other good things he has done.
And he deserves their respect, and he got it.
And when he suggested we do something, they all closed ranks and said fine.
During your years as department head, which section made the most progress?
Probably Spanish.
Because there were more students, more demand.
It's all very well to plan a wonderful program on paper, but if you don't have the students there, the courses will not make, and after a couple of years you lose the courses, you're right back where you started.
With Spanish we didn't have that problem.
And there began to be some majors in the languages?
Yeah.
And what did those students, what career
future did they?
It was an odd mixture.
Very few of them went into anything where the language was essential.
But I remember a few, but not too many.